WA6.md, before:

wget https://github.com/stechtmann/BL4300-5300/raw/master/data/Weekly_Assignment_data/Unk_therm.faa


make a blastable database for the protein sequence
makeblastdb -in Unk_therm.faa -dbtype prot -title Unk_therm


download the hsp.fasta
wget https://github.com/stechtmann/BL4300-5300/raw/master/data/Weekly_Assignment_data/HSP_prot.fasta


Query the blastable database with hsp.fasta

blastp -db Unk_therm.faa -query HSP_prot.fasta -out HSP_BLAST.txt -outfmt 7


Use winSCP to look at the HSP_BLAST.txt file to answer the questions

How many HSPs were found in the unknown organism?
There were 71 HSPs found in the unknown organism (there were 71 hits found in the 6 queries)

The E-value is a statistical measure to say what is the probability that I found this match by chance. If these numbers are very low then it means that there is a very low probability of us finding this by chance so it’s most likely a true match. So the lower the score the better


Based on the E-Values there are 10 potential HSPs in the unknown organism. Here are the 10 HSPs that were found in the unknown organism based on the e-values:
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1985	31.707	123	73	2	45	167	22	133	6.01e-17	70.1
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1863	34.066	91	56	1	79	169	31	117	2.11e-14	62.8
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1860	30.833	120	72	4	49	167	8	117	2.20e-14	62.8
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1117	25.773	97	64	2	73	169	33	121	1.91e-08	47.0
NP_418567.1	Unk_30	61.639	537	202	3	3	536	2	537	0.0	632
AJL35296.1	Unk_31	58.696	92	38	0	4	95	9	100	5.52e-34	109
AAA18300.1	Unk_1842	42.218	559	298	4	21	556	12	568	1.57e-139	416
AAA18300.1	Unk_301	27.723	101	67	2	152	252	100	194	7.26e-05	41.2
AAA18300.1	Unk_1187	26.946	167	106	6	175	338	172	325	1.30e-04	40.4
AEG34553.1	Unk_1970	32.800	625	285	17	557	1101	27	596	1.76e-54	201




There is no hard cut off to say this is what is a paralog so argue that you made the right choice, just give a logical argument use the twilight zone
e value first if its significant then look at bit score and %identity and if you have something that will fit within the twilight zone  or the safe zone


How many HSP have paralogs?


Provide a justification for the presence of paralogs.

Commit message:

Updated WA6.md Twilight Zone
Updated until the twilight zone

WA6.md, after:

wget https://github.com/stechtmann/BL4300-5300/raw/master/data/Weekly_Assignment_data/Unk_therm.faa


make a blastable database for the protein sequence
makeblastdb -in Unk_therm.faa -dbtype prot -title Unk_therm


download the hsp.fasta
wget https://github.com/stechtmann/BL4300-5300/raw/master/data/Weekly_Assignment_data/HSP_prot.fasta


Query the blastable database with hsp.fasta

blastp -db Unk_therm.faa -query HSP_prot.fasta -out HSP_BLAST.txt -outfmt 7


Use winSCP to look at the HSP_BLAST.txt file to answer the questions

How many HSPs were found in the unknown organism?
Just by looking at the data in the txt file it seems that there were 71 HSPs found in the unknown organism (there were 71 hits found in the 6 queries)


However, first we want to look at all of these hits and check their e-values to see what is a significant hit and a homolog. The E-value is a statistical measure to say what is the probability that I found this match by chance. If these numbers are very low then it means that there is a very low probability of us finding this by chance so it’s most likely a true match. So the lower the score the better


Based on the E-Values there are 10 potential HSPs in the unknown organism. Here are the 10 HSPs that were found in the unknown organism based on the e-values:

WP_103686269.1	Unk_1985	31.707	123	73	2	45	167	22	133	6.01e-17	70.1
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1863	34.066	91	56	1	79	169	31	117	2.11e-14	62.8
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1860	30.833	120	72	4	49	167	8	117	2.20e-14	62.8
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1117	25.773	97	64	2	73	169	33	121	1.91e-08	47.0
NP_418567.1	Unk_30	61.639	537	202	3	3	536	2	537	0.0	632
AJL35296.1	Unk_31	58.696	92	38	0	4	95	9	100	5.52e-34	109
AAA18300.1	Unk_1842	42.218	559	298	4	21	556	12	568	1.57e-139	416
AAA18300.1	Unk_301	27.723	101	67	2	152	252	100	194	7.26e-05	41.2
AAA18300.1	Unk_1187	26.946	167	106	6	175	338	172	325	1.30e-04	40.4
AEG34553.1	Unk_1970	32.800	625	285	17	557	1101	27	596	1.76e-54	201


Next we should look further into these 10 hits that we concluded were good homologs from looking at the e-values to look at the percent identity and the length of the alignment to determine if any of these hits are homologs. The percent identity is a function of sequence length, and the longer the sequence is the less identity might be acceptable to put it into this family. We can look at the graph from twilight zone of protein homology which gives us a rule of thumb for interpreting the percent identity in getting something into a protein family. We want to try to get the percent identity and length of the alignment to be in the safe zone because they will be the most acceptable and could be within the same family. However, if the percent identity and the length of the alignment ends up in the twilight zone the it could or could not be apart of the same family. Here was my interpretations:

WP_103686269.1	Unk_1985	31.707	123	73	2	45	167	22	133	6.01e-17	70.1  In the safe zone (% identity is 31.707 and alignmnet length is 123)
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1863	34.066	91	56	1	79	169	31	117	2.11e-14	62.8  In the safe zone
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1860	30.833	120	72	4	49	167	8	117	2.20e-14	62.8  In the safe zone
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1117	25.773	97	64	2	73	169	33	121	1.91e-08	47.0  In the twilight zone
NP_418567.1	Unk_30	61.639	537	202	3	3	536	2	537	0.0	632  In the safe zone
AJL35296.1	Unk_31	58.696	92	38	0	4	95	9	100	5.52e-34	109  In the safe zone
AAA18300.1	Unk_1842	42.218	559	298	4	21	556	12	568	1.57e-139	416  In the safe zone
AAA18300.1	Unk_301	27.723	101	67	2	152	252	100	194	7.26e-05	41.2  In the twilight zone
AAA18300.1	Unk_1187	26.946	167	106	6	175	338	172	325	1.30e-04	40.4  In the twilight zone
AEG34553.1	Unk_1970	32.800	625	285	17	557	1101	27	596	1.76e-54	201  In the safe zone

Based on these interpretations we can get rid of all of the ones that were in the twilight zone so we will be left with these Based on the E-Values there are 10 potential HSPs in the unknown organism. Here are the 10 HSPs that were found in the unknown organism based on the e-values

WP_103686269.1	Unk_1985	31.707	123	73	2	45	167	22	133	6.01e-17	70.1  In the safe zone
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1863	34.066	91	56	1	79	169	31	117	2.11e-14	62.8  In the safe zone
WP_103686269.1	Unk_1860	30.833	120	72	4	49	167	8	117	2.20e-14	62.8  In the safe zone
NP_418567.1	Unk_30	61.639	537	202	3	3	536	2	537	0.0	632  In the safe zone
AJL35296.1	Unk_31	58.696	92	38	0	4	95	9	100	5.52e-34	109  In the safe zone
AAA18300.1	Unk_1842	42.218	559	298	4	21	556	12	568	1.57e-139	416  In the safe zone
AEG34553.1	Unk_1970	32.800	625	285	17	557	1101	27	596	1.76e-54	201  In the safe zone

% identity is 3rd, followed by alignment length

There is no hard cut off to say this is what is a paralog so argue that you made the right choice, just give a logical argument use the twilight zone
e value first if its significant then look at bit score and %identity and if you have something that will fit within the twilight zone  or the safe zone


How many HSP have paralogs?


Provide a justification for the presence of paralogs.

Hwo do you evaluate what you would consider to be a hit. And we talked about some of those values like e values and % identity and bit score and those kinds of things. What are you looking for to say out of this list of 10 things that popped out of the blast hit to say is a hit and this isn't a hit. First look for e value to say this is a significant hit. This is the first cut off. So you can say based on the e value these are homologs. Next you could look at bit score, so the better the alignment the higher the bit score, but in terms of determining if something is a homolog you can look at this twilight zone. The length of the alignment look at it and come along with the % identity and see if it's in this twilight zone then you can make an argument if you want to accept it as a homolog or not. It's the idea of using e value to cut out things that are not significant to the things that are significant so you can use this as a tool for interpreting that. Justify why something is a homolog. To do the bit score it's just a score of the alignments so significant alignments have higher bit scores. Its more so to say which one is the top one to say the speak. The bit score is often within the output for a particular query its the higher matching one.
